foreign
I wanted to really start the story where
we began with braze braze was founded in
mid-2011 and you can see in this photo a
uh a shot of the early days of me and my
CTO John Hyman and co-founder uh this is
actually if you you look a little bit
closely you'll notice the bare concrete
floors we were in what I think was the
third ever we work and we were on the
top floor of it and they ran out of
money while they were finishing the
interior space on about the fourth floor
and so us and US of the other people on
the top floor has got to live with bare
concrete floors which I think is
probably an ingredient for category
creation Now we fast forward 11 years
later a little bit less uh humble
position we actually went uh public last
year on the NASDAQ today we are spread
out around the world I used to say that
our offices were in the current and
former British Empire but we actually
during covid started to expand Beyond
those borders as well we're a little bit
over 1200 employees today a little bit
over 1500 customers we are managing the
relationships of over 4 billion monthly
active users on behalf of our customers
and we do that in large part through the
sending of messages we send email push
notifications we deliver messages inside
mobile applications on websites through
loyalty programs and set-top Boxes Etc
what we're trying to do is really
understand the entirety of a customer
life cycle and communicate with them
throughout that in order to build strong
relationships we sell to job titles that
actually didn't exist when we started
the company we work with teams and with
us interdisciplinary skill sets that
work together in ways that were not
happening in 2011 when we started
brazing so what I want to talk about
today is really that journey of going
through category creation some of the
patients that it requires the
convictions how you navigate a
competitive landscape in those scenarios
and I think it's a lot of our learnings
are actually particularly notable in an
environment like today where it has
become you know harder to raise money
where there's definitely a volatile
market dynamics out there but where
competition is just as strong as ever
so
let's talk about a couple of the key
ingredients that it takes for category
creation one of the first ones is you
know within technology a little bit
easier to find but obviously we're
always going to look for massive
magnitude and change and when we see a
pace of change accelerating whether that
is the adoption of new consumer
technology maybe it's new back end
infrastructure and architectures that
are going to enable software to do more
interesting things maybe there are
changes in the broader you know
governance landscape things like data
privacy you know the Advent of gdpr the
move towards first party data have been
particularly relevant in our space at
any time we start to see change
accelerating it creates the opportunity
for a new category to potentially emerge
now for braze obviously mobile was a
really big part of that and if I go back
to 2011 we had a dual conviction that
was informed by our co-founders
experience using you know smartphones I
had actually worked at Google right at
the launch of Android I remember
remember the big fiberglass cupcake
getting rolled out onto the lawn you
know and really I'm kind of moving on
from my Blackberry and starting to
understand what the freedom of a
smartphone was going to mean for The
Human Experience but we took that a step
further and said what's going to happen
in the business world so there were two
things you know one was that huge
businesses would be born and built to be
mobile first and the second one was that
the wide scale adoption of mobile
technology by consumers would lead
Legacy Enterprise businesses to
transform themselves and change the way
that they did business now along with
that we started to think about what is
the consumer experience look like and
how how is that going to change the way
that Brands can understand and
communicate with their customers if
people were going to have these mobile
devices that They Carried with them
where you had an intimate connection
with that technology you brought it with
you everywhere you went you gave it
permission to interrupt your day you
gave it permission to understand more
about you and the context around you we
knew that that meant that there was
going to be a change in the way that we
kind of thought about communication the
way that we thought about our
relationship with Brands and it was
going to be something that would need to
be a lot more sophisticated than before
if you were going to be given the kind
of permission as a brand to interrupt
someone's life it meant that there
needed to be a reciprocal relationship
there you had to deliver value and
relevance in the moment and from our
perspective that meant that a lot of the
prior ways of thinking about things like
individual messaging digital messaging
communicating with customers were just
they were too basic they weren't focused
enough on providing relevance to people
they weren't thinking about timing in a
sophisticated enough enter so what we
saw was that you know a new there was
opportunity for a new category to emerge
there was opportunity for new skill sets
to enter into the field and there would
also be interdisciplinary collaboration
that would become necessary for Brands
to be competitive in this space
so that leads into I think the second
big one and one of the things that I've
always really loved about Braves and our
customer base is that we sell to job
titles that didn't exist when we started
the company when you look at you know
the concept of CRM it wasn't happening
at b2c scale in 2011 much less 2015 you
know part of that had to do with back
end architectures and and the kind just
the scale of data processing that was
available another big part of it is is
the what I referenced earlier which is
that when we developed this more
intimate and personal connection with
our mobile devices we also gave it
permission to understand who we were as
a person and the context around that so
there was more data available there was
better opportunity from a kind of cloud
data processing architecture standpoint
to understand all that data in the
moment but then of course there were
teams that were going to have to harness
that power and bring their own
creativity to life in order to
ultimately deliver what we needed which
were better customer experiences that
we're going to build stronger
relationships and so you know I I think
that as technologists and as business
Builders especially with early startups
you know we often will go more toward
what we are familiar with but in many
cases the opportunity that's coming
about because of change is it is
actually
building into brand new skill sets brand
new ways of collaborating brand new ways
of working and so a really big Takeaway
on this is that as you're building new
categories you obviously see that
opportunity for change coming about
because of the technical change but you
also can't lose sight of the human
change what's going to happen with the
practitioners of the category that
you're building into how are their skill
sets going to evolve over the next year
three years five years how are their
budgets going to get determined what are
the leadership you know that sits above
them how are they going to think about
team structures how do we look at
collaboration you know when we first
started it was rare for marketing teams
to take a a very fine-grained look at
the data that was that was determining
the entire life cycle of the customer
because in many cases marketing if you
think about you know putting up a
billboard or a TV ad or running a lot of
brand advertising there just wasn't it
wasn't a data Rich environment and so
there wasn't a lot that you know a data
analyst much less a data engineer which
again largely didn't exist when we
started the company I was going to be
able to do fast forward to today and we
see this concept of a modern growth team
where we bring together marketing
product and engineering and data and
analytics and that comes together in
this amazing you know feedback loop
where we can have you know imaginative
ideas come to life that are going to
help our help Brands engage their
customers better that comes out of
traditional practice the traditional
practice of marketing we pair that with
product and engineering resources to
help those ideas come to life more
quickly and then they evolve faster and
toward higher and higher levels of Roi
by bringing in data science and data
engineering that was a concept and a
kind of collaborative effort that wasn't
happening when we started but what we
had to do was really think about how our
you know how are consumer patterns going
to change what is that going to mean for
the opportunities for brands that
understand that and then how will those
skill sets and teams evolve over time
for us we also had we had there's also
the the kind of third major ingredient
here is to stick to your strong
convictions for braze if it was this
basic human idea that better engagement
with your customers will lead to Better
Business outcomes now in Mobile we had a
little bit of an issue in the early days
which is that from 2011 to call it 2014
that first stage of our early conviction
which was that huge businesses would be
born and built to be mobile first hadn't
yet arrived the biggest apps in the App
Store were like the compass app and the
flashlight app or the Arnold
Schwarzenegger soundboard right these
things are like fun and gimmicks but
they're not real businesses similarly we
saw consumer behaviors were taking a
while to change people weren't trusting
their phones enough to put uh you know
to put a credit card into it the cell
networks weren't fast enough I remember
having conversations with app developers
in 2012 or 2013 where they actually told
us that they didn't want their customers
to engage with their products because
they had already sold it to them for
1.99 in the App Store and the sooner
they stopped using it the sooner they
could stop paying the server bills right
these were these were like ideas in the
early days of mobile that were just
quite frankly immature but we had strong
conviction in our hypothesis that huge
businesses would be built in Mobile and
that through that process if we could
provide better engagement with their
customers it would lead to Better
Business outcomes and so that brings me
into kind of this third thing
which is that as you're building a
category you need to stick to your
convictions because it might take some
time and I'll put some data on this you
know for our own experience in a second
and then the second which we are all
well aware of right now is that markets
are wildly Dynamic and and can be
through this period there's going to be
speed bumps along the way and you need
to keep your your site set in a very
focused way on where you're going and
where you're going to get to in the
future
so I promise a little bit of data and I
know that at saster you know a lot of
the content here is focused on this
critical scaling path from 2 million to
20 million in error and you know this is
the the curve that we followed in order
to do that you know we ate x-star RR in
that two-year period but what I want you
to zoom in on here is actually when this
graph begins because that x-axis
actually doesn't start until 2015. but
remember we founded the company in 2011.
so it took four years for us to get to
the point where we started to really see
this acceleration in Revenue because the
market wasn't there yet we you know I
talked about all those job titles that
we sell to today that didn't exist guess
what they didn't exist in 2014 either
you know we knew and saw that these
opportunities were coming but they took
a while to really come to fruition it's
even more interesting when you look at
uh the market that we were selling into
because you can see global you know this
is a global smartphone sales graph and
it was rapidly accelerating from that
2011 to 2015 period interestingly enough
it wasn't until that actually started to
level off a little bit that we started
to see our Revenue opportunity take off
and so when you're working to create a
new category you know when you're
looking at everything around you you can
see that rapid change you can see that
opportunity ahead of you but you know
what I what I want everyone to you know
to really kind of find confidence in is
that in a lot of cases that opportunity
for businesses to be built and for you
to really start to rapidly accelerate
your Revenue you know is not necessarily
going to show up right from the
beginning there's a lot of energy
there's a lot of excitement
um and and you need to keep yourself
attached to those foundational
convictions but there needs to be
patience in the picture as well
we can take a look at this from another
landscape and you can see the number of
apps and games in the App Store you know
this number gets all the way up to 3
million
three million apps in the app store
before we got to 2 million in ARR
and then we were able to grow from there
we started to see you know it wasn't
about quantity it was about quality it
wasn't about how many different sound
boards could be sold as separate apps in
the App Store but rather who's building
sustainable businesses and that allowed
for us to to Really continue to lean
into scaling our go to market motion and
moving I'm moving beyond those early
days now there's also a super cycle
going on and this
and this is really important to think
about this as we're now you know 10
years after mobile and everyone out here
is thinking about well what's the
technological change that I'm going to
be able to find opportunity in and you
know what how do I think about the
pacing and what does the evolving you
know whether it's skill sets or it's
consumer preferences or it's the
evolving technology landscape you know
how how is this moving how do I know
that I'm in the I'm in the right part of
a curve well this is a really
interesting kind of longitudinal look
and what you're looking at is a chart
from The Economist that we have
augmented with the smartphone data point
in here and this is the number of years
that it took before these different
Technologies were used by one quarter of
the American population you know we
start out in the 1800s it took literally
almost 50 years before that was true for
electricity as we go through television
radio uh you know telephone it takes a
few different a few decades we get to
PCS and early mobile phones and we're
getting down to about a decade it only
took seven years appearance for this to
be true for the web and then smartphones
showed up and it happened twice as fast
it only took three years for people for
25 percent of Americans to adopt
smartphones and then it continued to
accelerate from there and and today
obviously actually has more reach than
any technology that's come before it
including things like clean water and
electricity and when we look at the
reach of smartphones and the opportunity
that I created a lot of that came
through the rapid pace of adoption that
however had a lot of uncertainty there
was a lot of dynamism in those early
markets there was a lot of early change
and you know we know this today as well
when we look at the market environment
when it's more challenging to raise
financing
you know it can lead to really tough
choices around what do I prioritize and
how fast do I grow I mentioned at the
beginning you know this is my first
saster came from New York uh Bray is
actually in the early days had a
difficult time raising financing if we
go all the way to 2016 into our series C
every single fundraising round that we
raised we only had one term sheet it
wasn't like you saw you know in Silicon
Valley with people chasing us around
different hotel lobbies and coffee shops
with a half a dozen term sheets
competing with each other in each round
we got one person to believe in us and
that was five years of development in
the business through this period and so
for us we were forced to learn how to
grow at the right speed we had a lot of
competitors that raised a lot more money
than us and you know we were kind of
forced to learn these lessons and I want
to share them with everyone today
because I think that the environment
that we're in is one where you know
being able to take those lessons and
apply them to your business no matter
what you know level of funding you might
be at can be really helpful because it
teaches you as a business to kind of
keep your eyes on that long-term prize
of category creation and the massive
addressable Market that Waits For You on
the other side of that but still do it
in a way that allows you to maintain
your efficiency and and build a really
value-oriented culture along the way so
bring that all together you know what
this means is to grow at the right speed
and I want to walk you through a couple
models about how I think about that that
I hope you can apply to your business so
first a quick little anecdote now I
mentioned that I worked at Google before
we started the company in that early
exposure to Android was important for my
conviction in starting braze another
place that I worked at briefly was a
hedge fund and during my new employee
onboarding we had a talk from one of the
co-chief investment officers of the
business and he drew three curves that
look like this up on the Whiteboard and
he asked the room you know of these
three Investments
which one would you prefer you've got
you know letter C where you you know
grow really fast in early days you you
know you hit the skids you come down a
little bit and then you emerge From the
Ashes and you end up at the tie end in
letter B you know you're you're kind of
slow and steady and then eventually you
hit your stride and you go up
or letter A where you know you're just
kind of you're growing methodically the
entire time
and this seems like a question about
risk tolerance right like how much
volatility are you willing to take on in
order to maximize your eventual return
or it could be a question about patience
how long are you willing to wait before
things really take off but of course you
know in the hedge fund world it's a bit
of a trick question because in letter C
all of your clients pulled out all of
their money when you crashed down right
there and you never actually got the
opportunity to Rise From the Ashes In
letter B you never got the fundraising
that you needed to really start to take
off and your competition outpaced you
from the very beginning letter A
actually ends up being the only one that
exists in reality right so this isn't a
question about risk tolerance it's
actually a question about how do we
navigate market dynamics over time
taking into account things like the
fundraising environment you know there's
also like when we bring this into the
startup landscape it also has
implications for the talent that you
bring on board how you engage your
employee base how you know you can
invest in your early customers and
continue to build on their experience
over time and so this this idea that you
know we can kind of choose between these
I think is it's actually a false choice
and what we need to be able to focus on
as a business is how do you end up being
that letter A so that you're actually
the only one still surviving at the end
you know especially actually when you're
in a world where you're trying to create
a category and it might take some time
so from there I want to introduce them
this model for thinking about this which
is the idea of using a supply and demand
curve to think about your addressable
Market
so when you're building a new category
your eventual addressable Market should
be massive but it might be the case in
your early years that your ability to
access that market incrementally could
be very expensive and so what you're
looking at in the with the supply curve
on the on the left here this blue curve
this is indicative of what the market
looked like for us and call it 2013 or
2014. we could spend money to access a
little bit of it you know we could we
could sell to there were a few mobile
apps out there that were operating as
businesses you know some of them were
trying to take a more sophisticated
approach to their customer engagement
they were excited to try us out and so
we were able to efficiently sell to them
but if we wanted to accelerate in 2013
and get up that curve we were going to
pay a lot of you know whether it was
money or energy we were going to have to
expend a lot in order to climb up that
curve and sell more
and a lot of startups get forced to do
this as well if you raise too much money
you know you try to grow too fast in the
early days before the market is really
there you find yourself trying to claw
up this curve but it's pretty inelastic
you know if you are trying to sell to
job titles that don't exist sometimes
you need to wait for those job titles to
exist if you are selling into a market
where consumer uh attitudes and
behaviors are taking time to evolve you
can help influence that but in many ways
you know the the kind of massive
momentum that's going to build through
that change can take time similarly if
you're building on the back of of new
artificial intelligence technology or
maybe um you know you're using new
architectures and building them out
there's there's other kind of external
factors that have a lot of mass around
them that will take time to build and so
when you look at this
if you want to grow over time there's an
interesting balance between how much do
I want to climb up this curve how much
do I want to pay to grow today versus
where do I invest to swing this curve
out over time and how do I think about
how that curve is going to swing out
over time
so
the most efficient path through this is
that you know you look at 20 you know
for us maybe 2013 2014 was that blue
line by the time we got to 2015 2016 you
know we get to the lighter blue dotted
line over time that curve continues to
swing out and then when you really hit
your stride and the market is coming
into its own that's where that curve
flattens out and then you can start to
pour more investment into scaling to go
to market but think about this
especially when you know you're working
through an environment that is going to
demand patients one where your financing
might be you know limited for a variety
of reasons whether that's because you
know the Venture markets have Frozen up
or because you know you're not able to
maybe show that early momentum yet
because the Market's not there yet and
and you know just keep that conviction
because if you truly are in a category
that's emerging and you're making those
long-term Investments these Supply
curves will swing out and if you can if
you can go to you know being that slow
and steady curve that goes up you know
eventually you're the last one standing
and that can be super super powerful
another important part of this is of
course keeping your focus on where
product Market fit is I'll provide
another anecdote you know I mentioned
that we had a hard time raising money in
the early days it was hard for us to get
the attention of the Venture community
that wasn't true for all of our
competitors but actually that market
reality and that curve was the same for
them so they found themselves trying to
claw their way up that curve and they
couldn't do it and so they unfocused
themselves they had these higher growth
expectations and so they went from just
doing you know messaging and customer
engagement they added analytics they
went into the install attribution
ecosystem and went over into the ad side
of the house they started to add
customer support and service you know
these are these were companies that had
50 100 150 employees and all of a sudden
they were trying to sell five products
because in order for them to actually
kind of Hit the growth targets that they
had signed up for they needed to access
not just one curve they had to try to do
it on multiple and so instead of
focusing on swinging that curve out they
wasted all their energy trying to claw
up a bunch of these really hard to move
up curves as the category was still
emerging the better strategy would have
been to ruthlessly focus on where you
knew the market was going to go to
maintain that conviction and continue to
build for that future so that when the
market does arrive you are a focused
company that is years ahead of your
competition you understand your customer
better you've been developing those
relationships and really building that
deep understanding in your product
organization and your go to market
organization and you're ready to really
go in a focused way and compete for that
emerging category
the next one is to really think about
your value chain which is you know as
this category emerges where do we think
the value is going to collect how are
people going to think about what they
want to pay for in this market how is
technology going to kind of change
around it and enable you to then
leverage a partner ecosystem so that you
can stay focused where your product
Market fit is and allow for all the
businesses around you to you know stay
in their lands as well and you work
together to emerge into this category
when we look at this for Brays you know
we mapped out the problem of customer
engagement through the stack and we said
hey if you want to have a great
conversation with someone there you need
to be able to listen to them so that you
can understand them better and then
through that understanding you can have
a more engaging and valuable
conversation
we took that very human concept and we
mapped it into technology we said we
need to be able to ingest data and be a
good listener one of the most important
things we did was that we vertically
integrated the data flow and we went
right into our customers products when
the data was being generated and we made
sure that it would get to our Sac as
fast as possible that was one of the
most important things that we really
held strongly to that was where our
product Market fit was going to be in
the future because we knew that we would
differentiate through having access and
control over that real-time data flow
the next aspect of it is really
understanding people so we wanted to
build through this classification
orchestration and personalization layer
and ability for these emerging job
titles these emerging skill sets people
that we're going to do consumer scale
CRM people that were going to do growth
marketing people that were going to take
data and a greater understanding of
their customers in real time in order to
deliver great experiences to them and so
we started investing really heavily in
classification orchestration and
personalization knowing that that was a
place we weren't going to partner we
weren't going to modularize that's where
the differentiation and the part of the
value chain that we really want to build
our mode around was going to be and that
continues to be the case today
but then we we needed to be able to
modularize you know in at other parts of
this when you vertically integrate the
edges of that vertical integration
should have modularity and so we knew
that we were going to partner to get
data into the system no matter where it
was being generated and that lived on
the top and we also knew that we wanted
to be able to communicate with people in
the in the way that made the most sense
and so that's why we also had modularity
at the bottom of the stack but focused
product development in the middle
now the last thing that I want to talk
through as well uh is is another look at
this technology adoption curve which I'm
sure everyone in this audience has seen
some version of in the past and in case
you haven't a quick tour is that you
know basically as you're building into a
new market in the early days you sell to
these early innovators they're willing
to deal with issues they they don't
usually have as much willingness to pay
but they'll pay with their time and
their energy and their collaboration
with you you move from them into the
early adopters and then as the company
really hits its stride you know you move
into both the early majority and the
late majority and you're selling to the
bulk of the market
now that kind of 2 to 20 million period
is a really interesting one because you
get to 2 million by selling to those
innovators and early adopters you get to
20 million as you're kind of crossing
over that Chasm but then when you hit
your stride and you want to scale to 100
million and a billion in AR when you
want to get to the scale where you're
going public you know you're going to
live in that middle of the curve in the
mainstream market for quite a while and
so a big takeaway here is that the area
under the curve really matters you can't
lose sight of tomorrow's customers and
you know accidentally over index on the
needs or the lack of needs of those
early innovators you know one example
that we had from the early days of raise
and looking at that came from our email
editors all of our early customers had
developer resources and so it meant that
none of our early you know early
adopters were asking us for a wysiwyg
editor for email right because they were
comfortable actually editing it and so
we we didn't see that in the early
demand signal but actually when we
finally went and built it we unlocked a
you know a much larger part of the
market that maybe just didn't have those
resources in the early days now I I
mentioned that last November we went
public and so I just wanted to share you
know a little bit of this anecdote that
is the equivalent of the wysiwyg editor
for companies that are really scaling
over the last year we had to go and
upgrade a bunch of HR and finance
systems and we went from great systems
built by you know emerging startups with
really intuitive UI ux
and and actually really attractive price
points and we had to upgrade to clunky
enterprise software with abysmal user
experience unintuitive interfaces and by
the way it also costs more why because
it's integrated with things that we can
audit it has the right to you know it
has the right Enterprise security
controls it has the right you know it
has all these things that are it's
integrated into netsuite or whatever
these other things are that we need to
use in order to close the books so we
got trapped in this interesting
situation where I had to pay more for
Worse software
because of these Enterprise needs that I
had which means that the businesses that
we turned off of are by definition
losing some of their best customers
right at a stage of growth when you know
they're ready to pay them a lot more
the reason for that is because they're
not prioritizing with the needs of the
later majority are going to be well
they're growing in the early stages and
so you know that that lesson of really
trying to think about what are the needs
going to be from that middle of the
curve where I'm really going to live for
a while as I get to 20 million go to 100
million and Beyond it's it's all too
easy to kind of end up with that myopic
vision of focusing on the feedback or
the lack of feedback right none of your
smaller customers are going to ask you
for something like that that you might
be seeing in the market so when you look
at category creation you know an emerge
a kind of a recurring theme through this
talk has been think about where you are
today for sure build for that but you
always need to have your eye on this
multi-year time Horizon how are consumer
preferences going to change how is
technology going to change how are you
know my customer skill sets and their
teams going to change what is that
market curve going to look like in the
future and how do I swing it out so that
I can grow more efficiently over time
and what are tomorrow's customers going
to really ask me for so that I can hit
my stride in the middle of the curb
where there's a lot more willingness to
pay and there's a lot more customers
all right so that does it for my time uh
and you know if the we'll have uh we'll
be able to make these slides available I
hope you found this informative and I
hope you've been able to learn from the
journey that we went through starting
out in 2011 the early Advent of mobile
and growing into uh where we are today
I'm uh Bill Magnuson if you want to
follow me on Twitter that's my handle uh
and we're also hiring at brace so check
it out if you want a job
[Music]